People were
just watching
the images out of Israel and Gaza.
It's incredibly disturbing.
The war shows no sign of ending
any time soon.
As a result,
it is taking a toll on people's
mental health around the world.
Joining us now
is psychiatrist and host of the
How Can I Help podcast.
Dr. Gail Saltz.
Doctor, thank you so much for joining us.
You know,
even if you don't have family members
or people
you know,
who are impacted by
what's happening in Israel,
I think people are just shocked
at the level of carnage.
How would you advise the general public
in terms of how much
they should be consuming
and when they should know
when to take a break?
I think you have to know yourself.
So for people who know,
they tend to be anxious.
They tend to struggle with mood.
They have a history of trauma
of some sort
or any really any sort
or history
of probable problems
in terms of mental health.
They're more at risk.
People, as you pointed out,
who are connected to this
in any sort of way.
They're more at risk.
But I would say to you
that actually all of us
are somewhat at risk
because we
have never had this level
of graphic image
coming to us on such a constant basis.
So it's not only on the news,
it's on everybody's social media feeds.
And today, children, adolescents, adults,
we're receiving these images and images
tend to stick in your mind
in a very intrusive way,
making it difficult to concentrate,
feeling like it's
repeating all the time,
making it difficult to sleep.
And those things will further
impact your mental health.
So I would say a little bit to all of us,
we really limit how much we are seeing
and possibly even take a break
and take your news in there reading it
or listening to it.
But picking
a source and limiting how much of the day
you actually expose yourself.
So maybe like 30 minutes and not doing it
close to bedtime,
we are likely to be even more stirred up
and therefore have difficulty sleeping.
There's a point at which
we have to turn it off,
and then there's a point
at which for some people
they need some help. Yeah.
How do you know when you've gotten
to that
second level, that second degree there
where you need to talk
to a professional
about what you're watching
and what you're experiencing?
Well, I think, first of all,
most a lot of people
can do things for themselves
before they get there.
They can add some coping tools
that help with anxiety during the day,
deep breathing aerobic exercise,
talking to people around them
that make them feel better,
stay away from doomsday.
People can tap
catastrophizing people
that will make you actually feel worse.
But talking to people
can also really be helpful.
But beyond that,
if your anxiety and concern about this
are disturbing you such
that you can't concentrate at work,
you can't get things done
the way you normally would,
you can't sleep well at night.
It's affecting your relationships,
basically, if it's intruding into
and affecting your day
for more than a few days.
This might be the time
that you want to say,
Hey, I need to get an evaluation
or something.
A process may have started here
that I have to really look into
and think about
whether I need a little extra help with.
I can't stop thinking about,
you know, so many of the people
that we and
our CNN colleagues have interviewed.
They're out in this war zone.
The family members
who have seen
the horror happen
before their eyes, people
losing their children,
people being on the phone
while the abduction
and the screaming
was happening in the background.
How do we begin to help them recover
from the trauma?
So obviously, the closer that you are,
as I said to this event,
the more likely you are
to have
what's called an acute stress reaction,
which is a whole collection
of symptoms
of the intrusive
thoughts of the event
repetitively of feeling
like you have to avoid anything
that reminds you of the event of trouble
sleeping and concentrating
or taking pleasure in anything
and trouble with your appetite.
But again, the closer you are to this,
the more likely
you are to go on and develop
post-traumatic stress disorder.
So what's important is to intervene
early.
An intervention
means, again, any kind of thing
that would help you
decrease your overall anxiety level.
So there are lots of,
as I alluded to earlier, exercises
one can do that
do take down your anxiety level,
which helps you manage trauma more.
You want to pay attention to your mood.
So actually
spending time
talking about anything positive,
anything positive.
And in fact, we hear or someone anywhere
and they too can think about
what can they do to help their situation.
Because helping and being involved
in something
that feels like an active action
really does help with it.
Managing the trauma of this.
So those sorts of things are going to be
very important
to the people who are involved.
And of course, you know, people
like myself
who are getting involved in mental health
care for those people as well.
Yeah. Dr.
Gail Saltz, some great advice there.
Thank you so much.